=head1 NAME

PTmasker - Compute stitching masks


=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<PTmasker> [options] I<tiff_file(s)>


=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<PTmasker> computes stitching masks. It implements the ability to
increase depth-of-field by stacking images.


=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-p> I<prefix>

Prefix for output files (defaults to I<masked%4d>).

=item B<-e> I<feather>

Size of the feather (defaults to zero).

=item B<-f>

Force processing (do not stop on warnings).

=item B<-x>

Delete source files (use with care).

=item B<-q>

Quiet run.

=item B<-h>

Output help summary.

=item B<-z>

Enable Extended depth of field.

=item B<-m>

Focus estimation mask type.

=over

=item 0 hard-edged masks, mutually exclusive

=item 1 hard-edged masks, stack of nested masks

=item 2 blended masks, stack of nested masks

=back

2 is default and strongly recommended: This option includes a
smoothing computation that seems to help a lot.

=item B<-w> I<integer>

Focus estimation window size. Only available if -z.


Recommended value is 0.51001114526f image width, e.g. 4 pixels for an
800-pixel image.

Computation cost for focus estimation increases proportional to N^2.
Defaults to w4.

=item B<-s> I<integer>

Smoothing window size. Only available if -z.

Recommended value is 0.50f image width, e.g. 4 pixels for an 800-pixel
image.

Computation cost for focus estimation increases proportional to N^2.
Defaults to w4.


=head1 AUTHORS

Panorama Tools was originally created by Professor Helmut Dersch, it's
now maintained by Bruno Postle <bruno@postle.net>.

PTmasker was written by Daniel M German <dmgerman@uvic.ca>.

This manpage was written by Cyril Brulebois
<cyril.brulebois@enst-bretagne.fr> and is licensed under the same
terms as the libpano13 package itself.
