Several programs and libraries have proven helpful when working with
Enfuse and Enblend.

@table @strong
@item Raw Image Conversion

@itemize
@item
@pindex dcraw
@uref{http://@/www.cybercom.net/@/~dcoffin/@/dcraw/, DCRaw} is a
universal raw-converter written by @sc{David Coffin}.

@item
@pindex ufraw
@pindex ufraw-batch
@uref{http://@/ufraw.sourceforge.net/, UFRaw}, a raw converter written
by @sc{Udi Fuchs} and based on DCRaw, adds a @acronym{GUI}
(@command{ufraw}), versatile batch processing (@command{ufraw-batch}),
and some additional features such as cropping, noise reduction with
wavelets, and automatic lens error correction.
@end itemize


@item Image Alignment and Rendering

@itemize
@item
@pindex ale
@uref{http://@/auricle.dyndns.org/ALE/, ALE}, @sc{David Hilvert's}
anti-lamenessing engine for the real die-hard command-line users
aligns, filters, and renders images.

@item
@pindex hugin
@uref{http://@/hugin.sourceforge.net/, Hugin} is a @acronym{GUI} that
aligns and stitches images.

@pindex nona @r{(Hugin)}
@pindex align_image_stack @r{(Hugin)}
@pindex fulla @r{(Hugin)}
It comes with several command line tools, like @command{nona} to
stitch panorama images, @command{align_image_stack} to align
overlapping images for @acronym{HDR} or create focus stacks, and
@command{fulla} to correct lens errors.

@item
@pindex PTOptimizer @r{(PanoTools)}
@pindex PTmender @r{(PanoTools)}
@uref{http://@/panotools.sourceforge.net/, PanoTools} the successor of
@sc{Helmut Dersch's} @uref{http://@/www.all-in-one.ee/@/~dersch/,
original PanoTools} offers a set of command-line driven applications
to create panoramas.  Most notable are @command{PTOptimizer} and
@command{PTmender}.
@end itemize


@item Image Manipulation

@itemize
@item
@pindex cinepaint
@uref{http://@/www.cinepaint.org/, CinePaint} is a branch of an early
Gimp forked off at version@tie{}1.0.4.  It sports much less features
than the current Gimp, but offers 8@dmn{bit}, 16@dmn{bit} and
32@dmn{bit} color channels, @acronym{HDR} (for example floating-point
@acronym{TIFF}, and @acronym{OpenEXR}), and a tightly integrated color
management system.

@item
@pindex gimp
The @uref{http://@/www.gimp.org/, Gimp} is a general purpose image
manipulation program.  At the time of this writing it is still limited
to images with only 8@dmn{bits} per channel.

@item
@pindex convert @r{(ImageMagick)}
@pindex display @r{(ImageMagick)}
@pindex identify @r{(ImageMagick)}
@pindex montage @r{(ImageMagick)}
@pindex gm @r{(GraphicsMagick)}
@uref{http://@/www.imagemagick.org/, ImageMagick} and its clone
@uref{http://@/www.graphicsmagick.org/, GraphicsMagick} are general
purpose command-line driven image manipulation programs, for example,
@command{convert}, @command{display}, @command{identify}, and
@command{montage}.
@end itemize


@item High Dynamic Range

@itemize
@item
@pindex exrdisplay @r{(OpenEXR)}
@uref{http://@/www.openexr.com/, OpenEXR} offers libraries and some
programs to work with the @acronym{EXR} @acronym{HDR} format.

@item
@pindex pfsin @r{(PFSTools)}
@pindex pfsout @r{(PFSTools)}
@pindex pfsview @r{(PFSTools)}
@pindex pfshdrcalibrate @r{(PFScalibration)}
@pindex pfstmo_* @r{(PFStmo)}
@uref{http://@/pfstools.sourceforge.net/, PFSTools} create, modify,
and tonemap high-dynamic range images.
@end itemize


@item Libraries

@itemize
@item
@cindex LibJPEG
@uref{http://@/www.ijg.org/, LibJPEG} is a library for handling the
@acronym{JPEG} (@acronym{JFIF}) image format.

@item
@cindex LibPNG
@uref{http://@/www.libpng.org/@/pub/@/png/@/libpng.html, LibPNG} is a
library that handles the Portable Network Graphics (@acronym{PNG})
image format.

@item
@cindex LibTiff
@uref{http://@/www.remotesensing.org/@/libtiff/, LibTIFF} offers a
library and utility programs to manipulate the ubiquitous Tagged Image
File Format, @acronym{TIFF}.

@pindex tiffinfo @r{(libtiff)}
The nifty @command{tiffinfo} command quickly inquires the properties
of @acronym{TIFF} files.
@end itemize


@item Meta-Data Handling

@itemize
@item
@pindex exiftool
@uref{http://@/www.sno.phy.queensu.ca/@/~phil/@/exiftool/, EXIFTool}
reads and writes @acronym{EXIF} meta data.  In particular it copies
meta data from one image to another.

@item
@pindex tifficc @r{(LittleCMS)}
@uref{http://@/www.littlecms.com/, LittleCMS} is the color management
library used by Hugin, DCRaw, UFRaw, Enblend, and Enfuse.  It supplies
some binaries, too.  @command{tifficc}, an @acronym{ICC} color profile
applier, is of particular interest.
@end itemize
@end table
